=head1 Name

qp_encode and qp_decode - DataFilter algorithms for quoted-printable encoding
and decoding

=head1 Overview

These two algorithms are part of the Lua-DataFilter package.  See the
overview documentation in L<lua-datafilter(3)> for information about how
to use them.

B<Warning>: these implementations of quoted printable encoding are not
safe to use for binary encoding.  Currently they will normalize line ending
characters in a way which could corrupt binary data, although they should
be perfectly suitable for processing text.  This is likely to get fixed in
the future, but at that point the default treatment of line endings may
change.

=head1 Default behaviour of C<qp_encode>

C<qp_encode> will escape certain characters using C<=> characters.  It
will also break the output into lines of no more than 76 characters in
length, using soft line breaks (C<=> at the end of a line) to avoid
introducing new hard line breaks (so when you decode the encoded text you
won't get extra line breaks in it).

Line breaks, both real ones and soft ones, will be output as a carriage
return followed by a line feed (US-ASCII characters 13 and 10).

=head1 Options for C<qp_encode>

The C<line_ending> option, if provided, should be a string.  It will be
used as the line ending, both for hard and soft line breaks, instead of
the default carriage return linefeed sequence.  An empty string value
will prevent anything being produced at the ends of lines.

=head1 Default behaviour of C<qp_decode>

This will reverse the encoding of characters performed by
C<qp_encode>, and remove soft line breaks.  The real line endings in
the input will be normalized to linefeed characters.

C<qp_decode> currently doesn't accept any options.
