=head1 Name

Lua-DataFilter - Lua 5.1 module for munging arbitrarily large amounts of data

=head1 Overview

This module provides a small selection of algorithms and a simple API for
feeding them arbitrarily large amounts of data, and storing arbitrarily
large amounts of output.

A complete list of the algorithms provided is given at the bottom of this
document.  Suggestions for other algorithms which would be appropriate here
are welcome.

=head1 Loading the module

The DataFilter module doesn't install itself into any global tables, so you can
decide what name you want to use to access it.  You will probably want to
load it like this:

=for syntax-highlight lua

    local Filter = require "datafilter"

You can use a variable called something other than C<Filter> if you'd like,
or you could assign the table returned by C<require> to a global variable.
In this documentation we'll assume you're using a variable called C<Filter>.

=head1 The simple API (string in, string out)

The most convenient way to use the algorithms is to simply call the Lua
function provided for each one, passing in a string.  The algorithm will
return its results as a string.

=for syntax-highlight lua

    print(Filter.base64_decode("Zm9vYmFy"))

    print(Filter.hex_lower(Filter.md5("password")))

The name of the algorithm is the name of the Lua function you can call,
which will be provided directly in the table returned by
C<require "datafilter">.

=head1 Algorithm options

Some algorithms accept options, which you can provide as a table as the
second argument to their functions.

=for syntax-highlight lua

    local options = { include_padding = true }
    print(Filter.base64_encode("frob", options))
    options.include_padding = false
    print(Filter.base64_encode("frob", options))

    local data = ("foobar"):rep(20)
    print(Filter.base64_encode(data, { max_line_length = 76 }))

The options you can use for each algorithm are described in its
documentation.

=head1 Processing large amounts of input

If the input data might be too large to load into a string, or if you want to
start processing data before all of it has arrived, you can create a DataFilter
object and feed input to it in chunks.  Call C<:new> to create the object,
passing in the name of the algorithm (which is the same as the name of the
simple functions described above).  Use the C<add> method to feed it the
contents of a string, and C<addfile> to feed in a whole file.

When you're finished adding input, the output is available as a string
from the C<result> method.  You can call C<result> more than once if
necessary, and it will return the same string each time, but once you've
called it the processing is finished, so you can't add more input.

=for syntax-highlight lua

    local obj = Filter:new("md5")

    obj:add("string data")
    obj:add("more string data")

    obj:addfile("filename")

    print(Filter.hex_lower(obj:result()))

The C<addfile> method can take a filename or a Lua file handle which has
already been opened for reading.  If it's a file handle, it will be read
until there is no more data.  The DataFilter object won't close the file
for you.

=for syntax-highlight lua

    local obj = Filter:new("md5")

    local fh = assert(io.open("filename", "rb"))
    obj:addfile(fh)
    fh:close()

    print(Filter.hex_lower(obj:result()))

A file handle given to C<addfile> can actually be any object which has a
C<read> method, so you can create custom objects which emulate file handles.
The C<read> method will be the only thing called by C<addfile>.  It will only
be called with a number, which indicates the maximum number of bytes it
should return.  The method should always return one of the following:

=over

=item data

A string, no longer than the number specified.

=item nil

Indicates end of file.  The C<read> method won't be called anymore after
it returns this.

=item nil, error-message

The error message should be a string.  This will cause C<addfile> to throw
an exception using the message.

=back

=head1 Producing large amounts of output

Just as you can use the object-oriented interface to provide arbitrary
amounts of input data, you can also send data to an output stream to
cope with arbitrary amounts of it.  The simplest kind of output stream
is just a filename, which will be written to whenever the object has
more output to send.

The output stream is always the second argument to C<:new()>, after the
name of the algorithm.

=for syntax-highlight lua

    local obj = Filter:new("base64_encode", "output-filename")

    obj:add("input string\n")
    obj:addfile("input-filename")

    obj:finish()

The C<finish> method indicates that all the input data has now been provided,
and causes all the remaining output to be sent.  After that the output file
will be closed.  You can't add more input after calling C<finish>.  The
C<finish> method will be called automatically when the object is garbage
collected, but it's usually a good idea to call it explicitly, because it
may take some time before the garbage collector gets round to collecting
the object.

You can use a file handle as an output stream instead of a filename, and
the file handle can also be an object which emulates a Lua file handle.
In that case it must be an object (table or userdata) which has a C<write>
method.  This method will be called with a string each time more data is
ready.

Finally, the output stream can be a Lua function.  This will be called
directly with a string when output is ready to be sent.

=for syntax-highlight lua

    local function output_callback (str)
        print("more output: " .. str)
    end

    local obj = Filter:new("base64_encode", output_callback)
    obj:add("input string\n")
    obj:finish()

=head1 Passing options to the OO API

If you're using the object-oriented interface to DataFilter, you can still
pass a table of options to the algorithm you're using when you call the
constructor:

=for syntax-highlight lua

    local obj = Filter:new("base64_encode", "output-filename",
                           { max_line_length = 76 })

    obj:add("input string\n")
    bj:addfile("input-filename")

    obj:finish()

If you want to provide options, but not an output stream, you can just
give C<nil> as the second argument.

=head1 Algorithms

These are the names of the algorithms provided by the DataFilter package
at this time.  Each name can be called in the ways described above, either
as a simple function in the table returned by C<require>, or passed to
the C<:new()> method when using the OO interface.

=over

=item base64_decode, base64_encode

Decode ASCII text to binary data or encode binary data as plain text, using the Base64 algorithm given in S<RFC 4648>.
See L<lua-datafilter-base64(3)> for details and available options.

=item hex_decode

Textual input consisting of hexadecimal numbers is decoded into binary
data.  This is the reverse of the C<hex_lower> and C<hex_upper> functions.
This can be used to handle some encoded binary files stored in PostScript
or PDF documents, as well as for decoding large hex numbers such as SHA1 hashes.

Each pair of hexadecimal digits is decoded into one byte.  Whitespace
characters are ignored.  Any other character in the input will cause an
error, as will an odd number of hexadecimal characters.

=item hex_lower, hex_upper

Binary input data is encoded as a series of hexadecimal digits, using
either lowercase or uppercase letters for the digitsE<nbsp>10E<ndash>15.
These algorithms don't have any options, and there isn't any input they
consider to be invalid.  The C<hex_decode> function will reverse the
operation of either of these functions.

=item percent_decode, percent_encode

Do percent encoding and decoding as defined by S<RFC 3986>.  This is
also often known as 'URI encoding' or 'URI escaping'.
See L<lua-datafilter-pctenc(3)> for details and available options.

=item qp_decode, qp_encode

Encode text using the quoted-printable encoding defined in S<RFC 2045>,
to make it safe for transit through baroque email systems.
See L<lua-datafilter-qp(3)> for details and available options.

=back

There are also the following message digest, or hashing algorithms, which
all behave in the same basic way.  None of them take any options, and they
all produce a small amount of binary output.  None of them produce any
output until all the input data has been read.  Usually, you'll want to
feed the output into the C<base64_encode> or C<hex_lower> algorithm to
get a human-readable result.

=over

=item adler32

Returns a 4 byte checksum.  The algorithm is given in S<RFC 1950>.

=item md5

Returns a 16 byte message digest using the algorithm from S<RFC 1321>.

=item sha1

Returns a 20 byte message digest using the algorithm from S<RFC 3174>.

=back

Currently all the message digest algorithms are limited to input which is
a multiple of 8 bits long (that is, you can only feed in bytes, not bits).

=head1 Copyright

This software and documentation is Copyright E<copy> 2007E<ndash>2012 Geoff Richards
E<lt>geoff@geoffrichards.co.ukE<gt>.  It is free software; you can redistribute it
and/or modify it under the terms of the S<Lua 5.0> license.  The full terms
are given in the file F<COPYRIGHT> supplied with the source code package,
and are also available here: L<http://www.lua.org/license.html>

The MD5 implementation was originally derived from the one in the Lua-MD5
module from the Kepler project, which is by Roberto Ierusalimschy and
Marcela Ozro Suarez, and Copyright E<copy> 2003E<ndash>2007 PUC-Rio.
This version has been extensively modified to fit into the DataFilter
architecture, so any bugs are likely my fault.

=for comment
vi:ts=4 sw=4 expandtab
